in SQL we have five different techniques
that we usually use in order to reduce
and optimize the complexity of SQL
queries the five techniques are
subqueries CTE view temporary tables and
C as and now before we do a deep dive
into the details for each one I want
first to put the fundamentals of two
things first we have to understand why
we need those techniques in the first
place and the second thing I would like
to give you an overview of the database
architecture and this is what we're
going to do now so now let's start with
the first question why do we need those
techniques in the first place so now
it's story time let's
go normally in Project we have a
database and we have a person that is
responsible for the database the
database administrator that take cares
of the database structure and now in
very simple scenario we're going to have
a user that is writing queries in order
to retrieve that from the database so he
or she going to write an SQL query and
then this query going to be sent to the
database where it's going to executed
and then the database going to return
the results so at the end our user going
to see the result of the query that he
wrote so this is a very simplified
scenario on how we use a database but my
friends in the real world things are
totally different things in real
projects get very complicated like this
so for example you have a financial
analyst that is writing a huge block of
SQL query that is very complex and there
will be like another user that have
different role like a risk manager that
is as we're writing a very complex query
and from different departments from
different projects for different tasks
you will have a lot of analysts that are
writing many complex queries so all
those analyst and managers have a direct
access to your database and they are
executing a complex analytic queries in
order to generate maybe a report or
something now not only those guys are
doing analysis on your database you will
have as well our friend the data
engineer that is saying you know what
I'm building a data warehouse and I
would like to extract your data so that
data engineer going to go and write an
extract query in order to extract the
data from the database and then he has a
different script for the transformations
in order to manipulate filter clean up
aggregate your data and then a third
script in order to collect the result of
the Transformations and load it in
another database called Data Warehouse
data warehouse is like special database
that collect data from different sources
and integrate it in one place in order
to do analytics and Reporting and now at
the end of this chain you will have a
data analyst and she writes as well
queries in order to analyze the data in
the data warehouse or you might have a
different query in order to prepare the
data before inserting it to a tool like
RBI in order to generate visualizations
and reports so we call this a data
warehouse system or a business
intelligence system that extract an
extra covery from your data and
manipulate it and transform it for
analyzes now not only we have a data
engineer and data analyst accessing your
database and doing queries we have as
well our friend the data scientist so
now our data scientist as well has a
direct access to your database so he
might write like different queries in
order to extract the data and as to
manipulate the data that are needed in
order to develop a model and doing
machine learning and Ai and now one more
scenario that I see in many projects
where the result of the data analyst
going to be used in another query in
order to prepare the result for data
visualizations powerbi or in order to
export like Excel list so as you can see
we have a lot of people with different
roles that want to access your database
and do analysis on top of it and that's
because everyone want to answer
questions based on the data and now if I
look to this I still think this is a
simplified version and how things works
in the data projects and I can tell you
a real project things are way more
complicated than this so now if you sit
back and look to this we will find many
challenges and problems for example all
those people are not talking to each
others and each one of them are creating
like their own query but if you go and
take all those queries and compare them
side by side you will find in the
scripts and queries logic that is keep
repeating so the queries from the
analyst or the data scientist and data
Engineers they might contain a redundant
logic and of course the issue of this we
have the same effort repeating over and
over and maybe not everyone is getting
the logic implemented correctly because
not all of them having the right skills
in SQL so this is a big issue in this
setup and now we have another challenge
having this scenario if you don't
optimize it you will have a performance
issue everywhere so the data warehouse
or the data engineer scripts might take
like 5 hours and the query from the
analyst might take like 40 minutes and
before inserting the data to reports we
might have 30 minutes and 1 hour there
30 minutes there and everyone else is as
well suffering from Bad performance on
their queries and the performance
everywhere is really bad so if everyone
is writing big complex queries don't
expect that they will have a good
performance now to the third challenge
that I observed in many projects and
that is the complexity now behind the
original database you might have a data
model that is prepared and optimized
only for one application so you will
have in the data model a lot of tables
and all those tables have different
relationship between them and of course
only the developers and the experts of
this database understand the physical
data model behind this database and now
if you give access to all those analyst
they will have a lot of questions
because first they have to understand
the data model before writing any query
so that means a lot of data workers are
keep asking our expert from these
database questions so for example how to
connect the table a with the table B and
where do I find my columns what this
table means I'm getting bad result in my
query because your data is really
corrupt so the developers of the
database will get a lot of questions
from the analyst and they have to
explain over and over their data model
so that the users are able to write
those complex queries so that means all
those users are stressing the database
esteemed by many questions and as well
the users are writing very complex
queries so the complexity is a really
big challenge now as well by looking to
this picture you will find a lot of
arrows from those quaries to the
database and this might cause a lot of
database stress so keep executing
repeatedly a big complex queries going
to makes really big stress for the
database and it going to bring the
database down and the last challenge of
this picture is that the data security
so if you leave it like this by giving
the users a direct access to your
database tables you might have a problem
because it might be okay for like some
data engineers and so on but you don't
want to give for each data analyst a
full access to the database tables so
you have to protect your tables The
Columns the rows everything so you
cannot leave it like this where everyone
having a direct access to the physical
database tables now enough talking about
challenges problems and issues let's be
solution oriented so what are the
solutions ions of those issues of course
there are many solutions but we're going
to focus now on five techniques we can
go and use subqueries or CTE Comon table
Expressions we can introduce views to
our database or temporary tables or we
can go and use the technique of the ctas
carer table as select so this is exactly
why we have to understand those five
techniques in order to solve all those
issues that we might face in our data
projects
all right friends so now after we
understood the importance of those five
techniques let's take a quick and
simplified look to the database
architecture because I want you to
understand what happens behind the
scenes and how the database execute the
queries from these five techniques so by
understanding this architecture you will
understand how things works so let's go
for each story there are two sides we
have the saver side and the client side
in the client side it's like for example
you you are writing an SQL query for a
specific purpose now in the server side
we have many things so the server is
where the database lives and it has many
components like the database engine the
database engine is the brain of the
database that handles different
operations like storing retrieving and
managing data in the database so each
time you execute a query the database
engine going to take care of it and now
in the database we have very important
component that is the storage and the
two main types of storage in a database
are disk storage and cache the disk
storage is like a longterm memory where
the data is stored permanently so it's
like the disc at your PC it stores the
data permanently even if you turn off
the system and one important feature of
the dis is that it can stor a lot of
data but the disadvantage of the dis
storage is that it is slow so it is slow
to write and to read now in the other
hand we have the cache is a short-term
memory where the data is stored
temporarily it's like the Rams at your
PC it holds the most frequently used
data so the database can access it
quickly in order to retrieve data and
the big advantage of the cach is that it
is fast so it is very fast for the
database to retrieve data from the cache
compared to the disk but the
disadvantage of the cache the data is
stored there only for short period so
it's like tradeoff between the speed and
how much data you can store and how long
now let's talk about the storage this is
very important in databases there are
typically three types of storage areas
there we have the user data the system
catalog and the temporary data and each
storage type has a different purpose so
what is user data storage it is the main
content of the database so it stores the
actual data all the informations that
are relevant for the users so it stored
there all the important data that the
users cares about so this is the storage
where the users are interacting all the
time so where do we find the user data
if you go to our database sales DB and
then you go to the tables now we find
all these tables that's we are already
used the customers employees orders and
so on those tables are the user data so
now if I go and say select from sales
orders and all those informations that
we are seeing now are the users data so
this is what we users actually care
about all other stuff that we see inside
databases as user we don't care about it
we care only about our data but in the
database we don't have only the user
data we have many other informations so
this is what we mean with the user data
storage now what is system catalog this
is the internal storage for the database
for its own information so it's like a
blueprint that keeps tracking everything
about the database itself so that means
the main purpose of the system catalog
is that it holds the metadata
informations about the database so what
is a metadata metadata is data about
data now let's understand what this
means what we have done so far is that
we have created a table called customers
and we have defined inside it like
multiple columns like the customer ID
first name last name and then we have
inserted our data inside this table so
we have inserted five customers so those
informations are my data I have created
those informations and and stored it
inside the database that's why we call
it the user data so nothing so far is
New so now what happens behind the
scenes is that the database server will
not only store the user data that you
have provided but also it's going to go
and store a different type of data
inside the database and this data is the
metadata so the database server going to
store the metadata of the customers
table and it's going to look like this
there is like a table name there is a
column names and those are the column
names that you have defined inside your
database and those are the column names
that you have defined as you are
creating the table customers and it's
going to store as well additional
informations like which data type like
the customer ID is int and the last name
is V charts and many other informations
like the length of the column and
whether the column is nullable or not so
as you can see in the metadata we are
having a description a data about the
structure of the customer
and in the metadata we can find a lot of
informations about not only the tables
and columns but as well about the
schemas and the database so you can find
a full catalog about the structure of
your database basic table the customer
table it contains data about the actual
data so it stores data about the
customers but the metadata of the
customers table contains data about data
so in the databases each table that you
are using in order to store your data
has a table twin that describes the
structure of your data so this is what
we mean with a system catalog or a
metadata and now you might ask where I
can find all those system catalog and
metadata inside our client here well you
cannot navigate through those
informations in the object Explorer like
we used to do for the user data but you
can find those informations in a special
hidden schema called the information
schema the information schema in SQL
Server is a system defined schema
that contains a set of buil-in views
that help us to find information about
our database like tables columns and
other objects so let's go and explore it
we're going to go and say select star
from
information schema and then let's have a
dots and now we get from SQL a list of
all views that are available in order to
browse the metadata of our database so
for example you can see here tables you
can see informations about the views and
as well about the columns so let's go
and select the columns and let's go and
execute it and now in the output we can
find informations about the schema about
the table names like for example here
the customers let me just go and select
this table and then we find all the
columns inside this table how they are
sorted so we have here the order of each
column and as well the data type and the
size of each column and many other stuff
so so as you can see we got here all the
informations all the metadata of each
table and as well for each column inside
the table so with that you can check
which tables does exist in your database
for example I find here like something
called test two so maybe I was trying to
test something I can go now and clean up
stuff right and this is exactly why the
database maintain such a catalog it
helps the database to quickly find the
structure of each table and of each
column and it helps me as well as user
to browse the catalog of the database so
for example I can go over here and say
okay let's get a distinct table name so
with that I will get a list of
everything that I have inside the
database so we have the customers
employees and some tests that I have
done so metadata are
awesome now we come to the third storage
the temporary data storage it is a
temporary space used by the database for
shortterm task like processing query or
sorting data and once these tasks are
done what's going to happen the database
going to go and clean up the storage and
now of course the question is where we
can find these temporary tables that is
using the temporary storage in the disk
well actually if you go to the object
Explorer you will not find it inside our
database sales DB but you will find it
inside the system databases now since we
are working locally we have the full
access to everything inside the SQL
server but in real project if you are
just user or let's say developer you
will not have access to the system
databases only for the database
administrators but now we are working on
the local K so let's go to the system
database and here you have a special
database from the SQL Server called temp
DB and if you go inside it we will find
here tables and temporary tables so this
is exactly where you can find all the
temporary tables that you are generating
now currently we didn't create any
temporary tables that's why it's empty
but once once we start creating
temporary tables you will find those
tables underneath this folder we will
learn about the temporary tables in the
next
sections so these are the main component
of the database architecture so now
let's have an example now we have a
table called orders that is stored
inside the user storage and the metadata
of this table is stored in the catalog
so now let's say that you are at the
client side and you write a symbol
select query in order to select the data
of the orders so now that query is sent
to the server in order to be executed
and the database engine going to take
the query in order to process it so
first the database engine going to check
whether we have the data in the cache
because if the data is stored in the
cache then things going to be really
fast and the database engine can solve
the task quickly but in this scenario we
don't have the orders informations in
the cache that's why the database engine
can to say okay it's not in the cache
let's check the dis so it will find the
orders information in the dis and the
query can to be executed then the result
of this query going to be sent back to
the client side where at the end in
return you will see in the output the
result of the table orders so this is
how the SQL database execute very simple
select query all right so with that we
have covered why we need these five
techniques and we have as well good
understanding of the database
architecture now next we're going to
Deep dive into each technique and we
will start with the subqueries if you
like this video and you want me to
create more content like this I'm going
to really appreciate it if you support
the channel by subscribing liking
sharing commenting all those stuff going
to help the Channel with the YouTube
algorithm and as well my content going
to reach to the others so thank you so
much for watching and I will see you in
the next tutorial bye